Getting Started
Core Concepts
Before integrating with Payd, it's important to understand the fundamental concepts that underpin every transaction.

Transaction reference
Every Payd transaction generates a unique transaction_reference. This is the primary identifier used across the entire lifecycle of a transaction:

API responses - Returned when a transaction is initiated
Webhooks - Included in every callback notification
Reconciliation - Used to match and verify transactions
Support - Required when contacting Payd about a transaction
Example response with transaction_reference
Copy
{
  "transaction_reference": "9BD103350408eR",
  "success": true,
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "message": "Processed successfully"
}
The suffix of the reference indicates the transaction type:

SUFFIX	TYPE
eR	Receipt (payin/collection)
eW	Withdrawal (payout)
eS	Payd-to-Payd transfer
eT	Top-up
Always store the transaction reference. Save the transaction_reference from every API response. You'll need it to correlate webhooks, handle support queries, reconcile payments, and look up transaction status.
Source of truth for status
A common mistake when integrating payment APIs is to assume a successful API response means the transaction is complete. With Payd, the flow is asynchronous:

CONTEXT	SOURCE OF TRUTH
Was the API request accepted?	success boolean in API response
Did the transaction actually complete?	result_code + status in webhook
Transaction succeeded	result_code = 0 and status = "success"
Transaction failed	result_code ≠ 0 and status = "failed"
Never rely on the API response alone. The initial API response only confirms that the request was received and processing has started. The webhook callback is the only reliable indicator of whether the transaction ultimately succeeded or failed.
Transaction flow
Here's what happens when you initiate a Payd transaction:

1
Your server sends an API request
POST to the relevant endpoint with authentication and payload

2
Payd validates and processes
Returns transaction_reference and success: true

3
User action required (if applicable)
Customer enters M-Pesa PIN, completes bank transfer, etc.

4
Webhook delivered to your callback_url
Contains result_code - the definitive transaction outcome

Transaction categories
Payd APIs support the following transaction types. Each has slightly different request formats and flows, but all converge on a transaction reference and webhook callback.

Collections (Payins)
• Kenya M-Pesa (STK Push)
• Pan-African mobile money & bank
• Card payments (Visa, Mastercard)
Payouts
• Mobile money wallets
• Bank accounts
• Merchants (Paybill / Till)
• Other Payd users
Key integration principles
📦
Always store the transaction_reference
This is your primary key for tracking, reconciliation, and support.

🔔
Always wait for webhook confirmation
Don't mark transactions as complete based on the API response alone.

🔍
Network discovery is required for Pan-African flows
Before processing pan-African transactions, query available networks and use their IDs in your request.

🔀
Handle hosted checkouts for cards and South African banks
Some payment methods return a checkout URL that the user must be redirected to.

UP NEXT
🔔
Webhooks
Set up callback handling

💳
Kenya Payins
Your first collection integration

Payd
© 2026 Payd. All rights reserved.
payd.money
Dashboard
Support